OSPF PROTOCOL OVERVIEW [RFC 2328, RFC 3101]

OSPF is a link-state routing protocol; an open standard based on Djikstra's shortest-path algorithm. It uses reliable flooding to ensure information about network topology is flooded throughout an autonomous system.

OSPF uses a single, dimensionless metric. Each interface in OSPF has a cost associated with it. The default cost as calculated by Cisco is 10^8/bandwidth. OSPF cost is an integer, so all interfaces with a speed of 100Mbps or more end up with an OSPF cost of 1.

Areas are used to provide stability and scalability, by abstracting the topology of an area away from those routers outside that area.

OSPF consists of four main components.

Hello protocol: this is used for neighbour discovery, as well as dead neighbour detection.

Adjacencies: if the parameters specified in the Hello protocol are configured correctly across both neighbours, and some other conditions are met (particularly in NBMA/broadcast networks), the neighbors will become ADJACENT. LSAs are only flooded to adjacent neighbors.

Database: the link-state database for an OSPF area is the sum of all router link states from within that area.

Flooding: LSAs (link-state advertisements) are flooded throughout an area, and summarised by area border routers.

BASIC OSPF OPERATION
Each router in an OSPF AS is considered to have one or more INTERFACES (a.k.a LINKS). Each INTERFACE is associated with an AREA. Each interface may only be configured in one area, however a router may contain interfaces in multiple areas. (See AREAS.)

Each OSPF router has a router-ID, a 32-bit integer which is used to uniquely identify a router within an OSPF AS. Normally expressed as a dotted decimal, but not subject to the same restrictions as IP addresses. By default, the highest numbered loopback interface address is used. If there are no loopback interfaces, the highest numbered physical interface address is used.

OSPF routers send 'Hello' packets out via all interfaces configured to run OSPF, detailing their router-ID and several other parameters, as a means of locating other possible OSPF speakers. On 'Point-to-point' and 'broadcast' interfaces, OSPF Hellos are multicast to the reserved multicast address 224.0.0.5, ALLSPFROUTERS. On point-to-multipoint and non-broadcast networks, Hellos are unicast; neighbour information on such networks is either manually configured or discovered dynamically through mechanisms such as Inverse-ARP. (On P2P/Broadcast networks, neighbours are discovered through the receipt of multicast hellos, so manual configuration is not required).

Within a single area, each router originates an LSA (link-state advertisement) detailing all its connected interfaces within that area, the cost of that interface, and the router-IDs (RIDs) of neighbours that have been discovered on each interface. On each router running OSPF, for each link within the area, Djikstra's shortest path algorithm is run with the current node as the root of the tree. Once the shortest path tree has been calculated, it is used to select one or more minimum cost route to each link (= IP prefix) as a candidate for installation in the global routing table. This is the 'Type-1' or 'Router' link-state advertisement, which is the foundation of the link-state database. A router LSA exists for every router in the OSPF AS, and is used to build the topology database against which the SPF algorithm is run.

Within an area, router LSAs are flooded to all adjacent neighbours other than the one that originated the LSAs. This flooding is reliable, ensuring that all OSPF speakers within an area have and up-to-date version of the link-state database against which to run the SPF algorithm.

On multi-access networks ('Non-Broadcast Multiple Access' and 'Broadcast' networks), such as Ethernet LANs or frame-relay/MPLS clouds, OSPF's system of adjacencies and flooding can lead to large amounts of redundant traffic. Consider a multi-access network with 5 routers; assuming each one forms an adjancency with every other, this leads to a total of 10 adjacencies. More generally, a multi-access network with N-connected OSPF speakers will require (N(N-1)/2) adjacencies, assuming all speakers become adjacent. OSPF attempts to address this issue through the use of 'Designated Routers' (DRs) and 'Type-2'/'Network' LSAs, the use of which allows the number of adjacencies and LSAs on a multi-access network to be substantially reduced. See MULTI-ACCESS NETWORKS.

AREAS
As the number of routers and links in an OSPF area increases, the CPU and memory required to maintain the link-state database and to perform SPF calculations increases. If an OSPF AS consists of a single area, all routers within the AS must be capable of maintaining the full OSPF database. Furthermore, instability in any part of the network (e.g. a flapping link/device) will result in LSAs being flooded to all routers in the AS and triggering SPF recalculations, causing CPU resource to be consumed.

OSPF attempts to address these concerns through the use of AREAS. Each router interface is associated with an OSPF area. An interface may only be part of one area, however, a router may support interfaces in multiple different areas. NOTE: if a router is configured with interfaces in multiple areas, it MUST have at least one interface in the backbone area 0. All traffic between areas traverses

An OSPF router maintains a separate link-state database only for each area it has interfaces in; therefore CPU and memory utilisation in routers in the network only connected to a single area are reduced. Information about routes external to an area is provided through the use of AREA BORDER ROUTERS (ABRs), which summarise information about links in other areas and flood them into an area. These summaries (communicated through the use of 'Type-3' or 'Network Summary' LSAs, do not contain topology information; they only provide the cost from the originating ABR to each inter-area destination.

ABRs contain full topology information for each of their attached areas, including the backbone. This provides them with sufficient information to route traffic to any destination in the backbone. They also receive summary information for all non-attached, non-backbone areas by way of Type-3 LSAs received from other ABRs connected to the backbone; this provides them with sufficient information to forward traffic to prefixes within these areas. Once the traffic is forwarded to an ABR connected to the destination area, that ABR can use it's full LSDB for the destination area to forward the traffic to the endpoint.

Hence a router internal to a non-backbone area need only know how to get to its ABRs; the ABRs will then forward inter-area traffic based on the summary information they receive from other areas' ABRs.

This has implications for the performance characteristics of routers in various roles. Thus far, the routers we have described fit into three overlapping categories:

* Backbone routers: routers which have at least one interface in area 0.
* Internal routers: routers which only have interfaces in a single OSPF area.
* Area border routers: routers which have interfaces in multiple OSPF areas, including at least one in area 0. (The backbone.)

Internal routers, belonging to either backbone or non-backbone areas, must maintain the link-state database for their own area, as well as Type-3 summary LSAs for all inter-area routes. They need only run the SPF calculation for their own area; network summaries are attached to the shortest-path tree as leaf nodes attached to the ABRs.

Area border routers must maintain the full link-state database for area 0, as well as any other directly attached areas. They will also maintain summary information for any non-attached, non-backbone areas. This means that they will generally have greater performance requirements than internal routers.

Note that when an ABR receives multiple LSAs for the same prefix, only *one* Type-3 LSA will be originated into other areas. The least cost of all the alternatives available will be used in the newly generated Type-3.

ADDRESS SUMMARISATION

Areas are also naturally related to IP address summarisation, as they provide an ideal control point through which to apply summaries. OSPF area address ranges provide a way of reducing the amount of routing information advertised between areas. Consider an ABR with the following routes to prefixes in area 10:

	10.10.0.0/24
	10.10.1.0/24
	10.10.2.0/24
	10.10.3.0/24

These prefixes can be summarised as a single IP prefix when advertised to other areas, including the backbone:

	10.10.0.0/22

This can be accomplished through the use of 'area address ranges'. When an OSPF ABR is configured with an 'area address range' for an area, it originates a single network-summary-LSA for that range, rather than one for each component network of the summary. This summary-LSA will be advertised with a cost equal to the HIGHEST cost of all the LSAs relating to constituent networks.

When a 'area address range' is configured on an ABR, that ABR MUST insert a 'discard' entry in its local routing table for the summary range. (Null0 on Cisco). This is to prevent loops from occurring when traffic is routed to an address within the summary for which the ABR does not have a specific route.

AS-EXTERNAL ROUTES

OSPF is designed as an IGP (interior gateway protocol), that is, for distributing routing information between routers in a single administrative domain (autonomous system). However, many networks have a requirement to connect to prefixes outside their own AS. Information about these prefixes is usually obtained through either static routing, or through the use of some EGP (exterior gateway protocol) such as BGP.

In either case, in order for all devices in the OSPF AS to have reachability of these prefixes, they must be redistributed into OSPF and flooded throughout the AS. This is done through the use of 'Type-4'/'ASBR Summary' and 'Type-5'/'Network External'  LSAs. These LSAs are flooded throughout the autonomous system, except in the case of stub areas. (See STUB AREAS).

Type-4/ASBR-Summary LSAs are originated by ABRs of the area containing the ASBR. They are flooded throughout the OSPF AS, except the area within the ASBR in question resides. (Note that routers within the ASBR's area will already have a Type-1/Router LSA for the ASBR, and hence the Type-4/ASBR-Summary LSA is not required.) Type-4/ASBR-Summary LSAs are also not flooded into OSPF stub areas.

Type-5/AS-External LSAs are originated by ASBRs, and are flooded unmodified throughout the entire OSPF AS. Again, AS-External LSAs are not flooded into stub areas.

STUB AREAS

Many OSPF areas are do not originate AS-external LSAs, nor do they require detailed information about the topology of other areas. In these cases, a default route towards the ABRs is often sufficient to ensure connectivity to inter-area and AS external destinations.

OSPF facilitates such topologies through the use of stub areas. In standard stub areas, Type-4/ASBR-Summary and Type-5/AS-External LSAs are not flooded in to stub areas; they are replaced by a single summary default route originated by one or more of the ABRs. This summary default is flooded only through the stub area.

All routers within a stub area must agree that the area is a stub; if this agreement is not in place, OSPF adjacencies will not form.

Virtual links may not be configured through a stub area; further more, ASBRs may not be located internal to a stub area.

TOTALLY STUBBY AREAS

This is a Cisco term, which refers to an extension to the stub area concept. In addition to restricting the flood of Type-4/ASBR-Summary and Type-5/AS-External LSAs into a stub area, when a totally stubby area is configured, no Type-3/Network-Summary LSAs are originated by the area's ABRs. All inter-area traffic is then routed by the default summary route, with only intra-area traffic relying upon specific information in the link-state database.

RFC 2328 leaves the question of whether Type-3/Network-Summary LSAs should be originated into stub areas open; Cisco chooses to refer to a stub area where no Type-3/Network LSAs are present as a totally stubby area.

NOT-SO-STUBBY-AREAS [RFC 3101]

One limitation of stub areas is their inability to support ASBRs. There are often instances where it is beneficial for a non-backbone area to be able to inject AS-External routes, but to only have default routes to for inter-area traffic.

OSPF supports this functionality though the use of an OSPF option, the NSSA (N-bit). All routers within an NSSA must have the N-bit set in their Hello packets, otherwise adjacencies will not form.

Any router within an NSSA may originate a Type-7/NSSA-External LSA, detailing the reachability of AS-external destinations. Type-7 LSAs are never flooded beyond their originating area. As with stub areas, Type-4/ASBR-Summary and Type-5/AS-External LSAs are not flooded in to NSSAs, nor are they originated there.

In order to allow OSPF routers outside of the NSSA to reach AS-External destinations advertised within an NSSA, NSSA ABRs perform translation of Type-7/NSSA-External LSAs in to Type-5/AS-External LSAs for origination into the backbone. From this point, these Type-5 LSAs will be flooded throughout the rest of the OSPF AS as per OSPF's normal flooding logic.

NSSA ABRs may be configured with area address ranges for AS-External addresses, which result in multiple Type-7 LSAs being translated into a single Type-5 LSA throughout the rest of the OSPF AS. The NSSA border routers that perform 7-5 translation are configurable; in the absence of configuration, a translator is elected. (Cisco use the ABR with the highest RID as the 7-5 translator).

NSSA ABRs should originate a default Type-7 LSA into the NSSA. This default should never be translated into a Type-5 LSA; however, a default route originated by an NSSA internal ASBR may be translated into a Type-5 LSA and flooded throughout the rest of the AS. This is controlled by the 'P-bit' (propagate) in the Type-7 LSA.

Like Type-5 stub areas, NSSAs may be either 'stubby' or 'totally stubby'. If an NSSA is 'totally stubby', the default route originated by the NSSA ABRs must be a Type-3/Network-Summary LSA. This ensures that the inter-area traffic is routed to the backbone, as a Type-3 default summary route will always be preferred over an externally originated Type-7 default summary.

Type-7 LSAs that are to be translated into Type-5 LSAs MUST have their forwarding address set; this non-zero forwarding address is copied into the Type-5 LSA. NSSA ASBRs will use the next hop of the external route if it is connected to an interface that is active in OSPF. If the next hop interface of the external route is not active in OSPF, another interface running OSPF on the ASBR may be used.

OSPF PACKETS

OSPF runs directly over IP, using protocol number 89. For type and format details, see [packet-types] and [packet-formats].
